+++
layout = "post"
title = "Consent Is Required"
email = "consentrequired"
date = 2025-03-29
tags = ["off-topic", "ethics", "consent", "trust"]
draft = true
summary = """As I sit here trying to write this intro, I wonder how many more times someone
is going to remind me exactly how important consent is, or remind me how easy it
is to lose sight over how much influence any individual has over another."""
+++

As I sit here trying to write this intro, I wonder how many more times someone
is going to remind me exactly how important consent is, or remind me how easy it
is to lose sight over how much influence any individual has over another. In
addition to how easy it is to miss the connections between some action and it's
outcome; the more layers of indirection required as any system increase in size,
the harder it becomes to even describe how, or who plays which part. The ease at
which anyone might forget, or how the difficulty grows as the system becomes
more complex, doesn't seem to be the part that irks me. Sadly, the more I look
for it, the more I see software engineers, or the systems they drive, ignore
consent. This is bad, and collectively we should be embarrassed enough to do
something.

Opinions differ[^difficulty] on what exactly counts as consent. I'd venture to
guess it gets even more complicated when it comes to software. I'm sure that
contributes to why TOS are so unparseable by people required to agree to them,
that there's even a website dedicated to explaining common ones[^dislike]. What
does consent look like when it's software in between? If someone continues to
use the software, isn't that consent? No, it's not. 

[^difficulty]: Mine don't; clearly communicated agreement with disclosure. It's
    not hard, **consider the other human too!**

[^dislike]: It's [TOS;DR](https://tosdr.org/), which I elect to only link here
    because I disagree with a number of it's conclusions and assertions. I still
    applaud the attempt.

In something that I'm sure isn't a shock to those I expect to read this. I'm
gonna use an example from healthcare again. For any significant procedure,
there's someone who's been assigned to collect a signature on the paper that
will make the hospital's lawyers happy. But the patient signing their agreement
on the "terms of service" for the treatment, isn't where consent ends. Consent
is more than just tick this checkbox and then tap submit. Healthcare has
learned, many times through mistakes; about what consent really means to the
humans they treat[^humans]. It's easy to put any one into a situation where
they'll "agree" to something. Only to then feel taken advantage of, or abused.
Abused by people who day job is literally to save their life, and help them
heal. One of the most common reasons cited is; 

[^humans]: We're talking about medicine here because they better at
    understanding what they do to humans. Their interactions with humans aren't
    abstracted away by vscode.

> I didn't understand what was going on.

That's it, no one talked to them, no one told them what to expect, patents under
a significant amount of stress, who ostensibly trusted the people taking care of
them. Would feel victimized simple because they know what was going on. The end
result from some treatment with the primary goal of improving their health left
feeling abused. This isn't the experience of patents when someone is
consistently talking to them, explaining them what's gonna happen next.
Reminding them during difficult procedures that they can ask to take a break if
they need it. Those patients leave from the exact same exchange feeling cared
about, and taken care of. Simply telling someone what to expect before it
happens, and importantly giving them the option to opt out. It might be shocking
to your average software engineer how far treating users with just a little bit
respect will go.

Serendipitously I happen to come across this photo when doing something
completely unrelated to writing this.

[Photo of Microsoft getting consent]

This is consent right? Permission freely given? 

The last medical procedure I participated in was one of my own. It was an MRI
with contrast of my shoulder. 

> Q: Can I go back to the original mobile app layout?

> A: We understand the change might take some getting used to, and we're here to
> help make that transition as smooth as possible for you. But with this update,
> the original mobile layout is no longer available.


https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/12654190110999-New-Mobile-App-Updates-Layout



